# Computing Environments for Children

A Reflection on Theories of Learning and Education

Cynthia Solomon

## Summary

As a first strategy in exploring the many ways computers have been
used in education, I focuson two images of the computer: (1) the
computer as an interactive textbook in control of the user and (2) the
computer as an expressive medium under the control of the user. As
examples of thecomputer-as- textbook, I chose two different
approaches. Patrick Suppes, of Stanford University,developed a system
to provide students with sequenced drill- and-practice exercises,
whereas Robert Davis, of the University of Illinois, using the Plato
system, imbued the computer with aSocratic style of interaction. With
regard to the computer as expressive medium, I again chosetwo
approaches. Tom Dwyer and his colleagues at the Solo works laboratory
at the University of Pittsburgh developed a variety of programming
activities around BASIC, and Seymour Papert and his Logo group at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology developed new mathematics and
new technology for children.

Another strategy of this book is to treat each trend in terms of its
relationship to elementary school education and to concentrate on
examples from work in mathematics. I selected elementary education
because my own interests have crystallized around children, their
social,intellectual, and emotional development, and how teachers can
contribute to the developmental process. I chose mathematics because
the methods of computer usage in this area represent general theories
of instruction and epistemological positions that take on different
forms indifferent disciplines but happen to be most clearly realized
in mathematics.

In reading this book, I remind you of my belief that whether people
are designers of environments or participants in the environments, it
is important for them to think about the rolethey play and the
explicit and implicit assumptions they make within their environment.

----

[Back to Computer Environments for Children](Home.md)

![logothings](./images/logo-shadow-40.png) [Back to Home Page](../Home.md)
